[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's
video we want to introduce the Hindu Arabic
numerals as a way of extending our understanding
of natural numbers so for us the Hindu Arabic
framework is not just a shortcut for efficiently
describing natural numbers it's actually a way of
extending the arithmetic of our primitive natural
numbers into territory that's beyond what they
themselves can support okay so the setup is this
that we're starting with this vexel point of view
so a vexel is an M set of Singletons with type Vex
and then last time we talked about base 2 vexels
these are vexels together with an additional
Exchange Rule The Exchange rule is such that
if you have a pair of Singleton n in a multi
set then you are allowed to exchange them for a
single Singleton of n+ one and conversely a single
n plus1 Singleton can be exchanged or converted to
these pair of n Singletons now here N is a natural
number A Primitive natural number which we assume
we've already established those were our M sets of
our B underlying Strokes or marks so today we want
to do a very similar kind of thing but we want
to move from base 2 to the more familiar base
10 but what we're going to be basically doing
is very analogous to the base two story so the
definition is that a base 10 vexel is a vexel so
something like this coming from the original vex
together with the following exchange rules so the
exchange rules now are of a more complicated type
because there's 10 things on the left hand side
rather than two things so if we have a Singleton
n with another Singleton n and another and another
and another and another and another and another
and another and another all in an M set then we're
going to agree that we can take those 10 Singleton
ends and replace them with a single Singleton n +
one and conversely one of these can be exchanged
for these and The crucial thing of course is that
there are 10 here on the left hand side that's why
we're getting a base 10 pixel and so our type for
these base 10 vexels is Vex 10 and we're going to
agree that this particular type of vexel will
have an alternate name for its type just num so
we're actually going back to the notation that we
started uh this series off a long time ago um we
had num but now we're introducing it in a somewhat
different way so now num really does represent a
Hindu Arabic numeral we'll refer to them as Hindu
Arabic numerals and they are officially somewhat
different objects from natural numbers although
in practice we will consider them to be natural
numbers just sort of an familiar alternate
form for natural numbers but officially they
are something a little bit different they're built
up from natural numbers but you can think of them
as more complicated sophisticated entities with
a more sophisticated arithmetic that allows one
to extend arithmetic to higher Realms and the
addition and multiplication of these base 10
vexels is really the same as four vexels all
right so let's have a look at an example so
here's a vexel 0 01 1 1 3 4 4 now in this world of
Vex 10 so we're assuming we're in Vex 10 then this
thing here can be represented in our usual kind
of vexal notation by giving a column Vector kind
of approach there's two zeros there's three ones
a single three and two fours so our vexal n is
represented by this Vector Now using the exchange
rules in Vex 10 this three for example one of them
could be exchanged for 10 of the previous ones so
if we change this three to a two we can compensate
for that by adding 10 to the two so it becomes 12
so this vexel is the same as this vexel in Vex 10
another thing that we could do is starting with
this we could replace this uh one of these things
here uh with essentially 10 of the previous so
we take one of these fours and replace it with
10 threes giving us all togethere 11 3es and only
one four another thing that we could do starting
again with this is to take these three ones and
convert them all into zeros so each one of them
would be converted to 10 zero Singletons so the
three Al together would give us 30 to join with
these ones giving 32 zeros so this is also equal
to this and if we convert everything into just
zeros because we can do that we can convert
each one of these fours to 10 threes we can
convert then the threes to 10 twos the twos
to 10 ones and the ones to 10 zeros it's like
converting everything into $1 bills you convert
your $1 bills $10 bills $100 bills ,000 bills
you convert everything into just $1 bills that's
what we're doing here when we get that this thing
is the same vexel as this one so it's 21 32 2 1 32
so in vexel 10 these are all legitimate and equal
expressions for this original vexel here we have
a flexibility in this system it's very useful kind
of flexibility all right so let's have a look at
some bigger numbers in this light so we're still
working in our base 10 vexel framework and let's
look at this one which we'll call n and it's an M
set of Singletons and we'll suppose that there
are actually 47 of these zero Singletons two
Singletons of two and 15 Singletons of three and
let's consider also another one called M which has
three Singletons of zero four Singletons of one
and 936 Singleton 2os okay so this n then can be
written in sort of a standard Vector form as 47 0
because there are 0 one single tense 2 15 so this
Vector of multiplicities captures the M set it's
like a list that captures the multiplicities in
the under lying M set okay we can rewrite this
thing because this 47 here can be converted into
7 zeros and four ones okay so we can take 40 of
these zeros which are Str out here and convert
them into four one Singletons and so we can do
that and similarly the 15 here is represents 15
uh threes so we can take 10 of those and convert
them into to a single four giving us then five
threes left over and one four and something
else that we could do is convert everything
into zeros so the four here could be moved
there would give us 40 the two could be moved
there giving us essentially 200 the five could
be moved there giving us 5,000 and the one could
be moved there giving us 10,000 with the result
of the number that we usually call 15,247 that's
kind of a compressed view of this base 10 vexel
this is the expanded view this is the view that's
more familiar in terms of base 10 number where
each one of these entries is a digit from 0 to
9 okay and here is M this vexil here is 3 4 and
936 and if we like we could convert
this 936 to 693 so basically we'll
take 930 of those Singleton 2os
and convert them into 93 Singleton
3s and we could go one step further take 90 of
those Singleton 3s and convert them into nine
Singleton fours now this thing is in extended
form and here's the corresponding compressed
form where we bring everything to the top so
this four becomes 40 this six becomes 600 this
three becomes 3,000 and this 9 becomes 90,000
for a total of 93,6 43 all right so let's look
at addition first so we're working in our base
10 vexels and we have our vexels n and M here
they are here in our usual form we want to add
them okay so here's the usual story that we're
all familiar with so to add these two numbers
in Hindu Arabic form we would write one on top
of the other like this line up the ones the tens
and the hundreds and so on and then we would start
adding on the left so 7 + 3 is 10 we write down
the zero and carry the one 4 + 4 + 1 is 9 2 + 6
is 8 5 + 3 is 8 and the 1 + 9 is 10 write down
the zero carry the 1 and then write down that
one okay let's look at the same operation in a
vexel point of view all right so this number n
is represented by this vexel basically the left
Point here corresponds to the bottom entry so 1
5 2 47 or another way to think about it was we're
reading it from the ones first 74251 and this one
over here is 3 4 6 39 so to add them in the vexel
world we just add component wise 7 + 3 is 10 4 + 4
is 8 2 + 6 = 8 5 + 3 = 8 1 + 9 = 10 we don't mind
that maybe some of these entries are bigger than
10 this is allowed in this base 10 vexel system
this is also a legitimate base 10 vexel but we
can if we want to convert it into a extended
kind of form we can convert these 10 zer to
a single one so we have then zero zeros and nine
ones 88 and this 10 here can again be converted
into a one of the next kind giving us zero and
one so uh when we read back up 1 8 89 0 we get
the same thing as before so the benefits of this
approach they're obviously quite similar in this
situation but the benefits of this approach are
more obvious with sums involving many numbers so
if we had to add not just two numbers but we had
to add maybe 10 or 100 or a thousand numbers then
there would be a considerable advantage in working
horizontally for the reasons I've already talked
about in our last video that basically there's
going to be more room in this horizontal form
to have big numbers occurring here we're not
constrained by a Rel atively small area there
to actually place a column total we'll see this
figuring in our discussion of multiplication next
all right so let's have a look at multiplication
which is considerably more subtle let's multiply
n * m there's n there's M and here's the usual
story we write them down horizontally and then
to multiply them what we do is we essentially
multiply the first number by each of the digits
of the second number and then add totals so we
multiply 15247 first by three we start on the
right 3 * 7 is 21 so we have a one and a two we
carry a two and then 3 * 4 is 12 we have to add
the carry of two giving us 14 so we write down
the four and carry the one and now 3 * 2 is 6 and
the one makes s then 3 * 5 is 15 we write down
the five and carry the 1 and 3 * 1 is 3 + 1 is
4 okay and then at the next stage we multiply
by this four as you all know but I know you all
know this but let me do it anyway so the four then
multiplied by these things is 4 * 7 is 20 eight so
there's an eight now but because we're multiplying
by this one here we have to actually sort of start
one over so we put the eight there and carry the
two um we put the two up here 4 * 4 is 16 plus
that two actually it's that two there that's the
second two that was a carry now 4 * 4 is 16 plus
the 2 is 18 so there's an8 and then a carry of one
and then 4 * 2 is 8 + 1 is 9 and we carry on like
this the next one will with multiplying by six
will give us this the next one three is the same
as that first one there so we can copy that one
there and then when we multiply by nine we have
uh some more things to do now note that every time
we do this we are introducing more carries and we
want to record those carries and you can see that
the carrying kind of area gets a little bit full
right because every time we have a carry we have
to write it down someplace so that we remember the
next step to add it and if we were going to do
this by hand we see that uh you know if we had
two numbers that were maybe 100 digits long then
this area up here would get very crowded it would
be actually a little bit impractical to to do it
we would get mixed up in terms of which one is the
relevant carry because there's so many carries up
there okay so anyway we have these various single
products and then we have to add them all up and
we start from the right one and then 4+ 8 is two
and there's another carrying going on there and
then we add up the columns and carrying in the
usual fashion we end up getting that number
there okay so the carrying story really is uh
I guess what makes this challenging for students
they have to learn how to do the carrying in the
right way and there's quite a lot of carries that
are involved especially if you have bigger numbers
and as I've said uh it can get quite uh messy and
maybe overly complicated if you have two very big
numbers now I wouldn't be surprised if many of you
younger viewers regarded that previous um kind of
calculation with the multiplication as almost
a dinosaur kind of activity it's probably not
something that you had lots of training in because
these days the calculator is never far from your
fingertips and so that whole procedure is maybe
something that you know formally you are familiar
with but actually doing it practically might be a
little bit of a challenge and maybe some students
have actually never really been taught this at
all maybe in some places multiplication is just
something that you do on a calculator in that case
I think this vexel way of doing things which I'm
not going to show you uh provides an interesting
alternative to The Familiar one one which I think
is somehow conceptually easier to understand it's
easier to understand what's going on and why we're
doing the various things that we're doing here
in this approach where we're thinking about the
numbers as being vertical rather than horizontal
so we're going to take the same two numbers and
regard them in a vexal fashion we'll multiply them
as columns so 5 2 47 1 5 247 93643 93643 and what
we're going to do is very similar to what we did
in that previous thing so we're going to multiply
this First Column by three this is really just
poly number multiplication okay but we're going
to think about it as taking this and multiplying
it by three and 3 * 7 is 21 3 * 4 is 12 3 * 2 is
6 3 * 5 is 15 3 * 1 is 3 notice we're just writing
wrting down the various products that are obtained
and not doing any kind of adjustment we're just
writing them down then when we move to the next
digit here the four we're going to do exactly
the same just multiply this four with all of
these record all the possible products 28 16 8 20
and 4 and then we multiply by six and we get this
column here each column is offset one down from
the previous one 6 * 7 42 and so on and then we
multiply by three we get this column and finally
multiply by 9 we get 63 36 18 45 and 9 note that
we haven't done any carrying we are only concerned
with multiplications between these various digits
and if you go back to the previous uh page you'll
see that each one of these multiplications was a
multiplication that we did there as well just that
we typically included it with a carry from the
previous one we didn't write it down explicitly
we only wrote down the rightmost digit here we're
writing down all the possible products now what
we have to do is just add all of these things up
horizontally 21 12 + 28 is 40 6 + 16 + 42 =
64 we add horizontally all the way down to 9
this is an answer this is what the product of
these two things is in our Vex 10 framework
but it's not in the standard extended form to
put it in standard extended form we want each
one of the digits to be between 0 and 9 that
means we have to convert more than 10 things
to one of the next one so we take this 21
and we convert the 20 to 2 of the next type
so then we only have one of these and now we
have 42 of them we write down the two and we
take the 40 and convert them into four of the
next type so now we have 68 of these we write
down the eight and convert the 60 into six
of the next kind giving us 74 we write down
the four and then convert the 70 into 7 giving
us 117 we write down the 7 and convert the 110
that's left over to 11 of these 11 uh added to
76 is uh 87 we write down the seven and add 8 to
here giving us 47 we write down the seven and add
four to here giving us 52 we write down the two
and add uh five to here giving us 14 we write
down the four and add one to here and there's
the one so the carrying is all concentrated in
this last step as we convert each one of these
into something that's just between zero and N
by converting the other ones using the exchange
rules to fellows further down and you can see we
can do that in our heads reasonably efficiently
so this is a way for us to circumvent a lot of
those carries that were s distributed throughout
the whole procedure in the last case now all the
carrying is sort of concentrated at the end mind
you there's also a little bit of carrying as
we add up these uh rows here so when we added
up these rows we would of course also have to do
a little bit of carrying to add up to get to 110
typically okay so I claim that for multiplying
big numbers by hand especially if someone is
not too proficient and hasn't spent a lot of time
practicing this is a much more reliable and simple
method so this is multiplication using our vexel
approach basically our really the approach that
goes back to poly numbers our poly number
orientation to do things horizontally um
one column at a time and to convert all the
carryings at the end and the number that we
get is the same number that we got with the other
method so so to summarize what we've done is we've
introduced these Hindu Arabic numerals which
we're denoting by type num which you can think
of as standing for numeral now as essentially
base 10 vexels okay and these are built up from
our primitive natural numbers so we assume
we already understand our primitive natural
numbers and these vexels as objects are M sets
of Singletons where a Singleton is a list of one
natural number the arithmetic with these numerals
is defined independently of our arithmetic with
primitive natural numbers it's not that we're
just taking the prior arithmetic of natural
numbers and just converting it into an arithmetic
for these things we're defining a new arithmetic
on these guys which is extending the arithmetic
of natural numbers it applies to numerals which
are so big that they don't refer to actually any
particular primitive natural numbers that we can
write down so our arithmetic is capable of dealing
with numbers that have hundreds or maybe thousands
of digits long these numbers would be too big to
actually represent primitive natural numbers but
nevertheless they have an independent arithmetic
which we have just been defining here and the the
whole thing really rests on the vexal arithmetic
or the polum arithmetic and these exchange rules
that allow us to convert 10 of one level to one
of the next level there's something to be done
here one has to verify that the arithmetic
is actually well defined that this exchange
condition of changing 10 of these with one of
these is actually well defined in the sense that
the arithmetic is still uh independ dependent
of which of the various possible forms of a
vexel that we use so if we have a vexel here and
a vexel here we multiply them and then we change
the two vexels by making various applications
of the exchange rules we want to then convince
ourselves that what we get is exchangeable with
what we originally got Again by just the exchange
rules so that's a great exercise for you to think
about and we see that the arithmetic with these
numerals these Hindu Arabic numerals is actually
quite a lot more efficient than arithmetic with
our primitive natural numbers that's the point and
the beauty of the Hindu Arabic system right it's a
lot simpler than just working with uh Strokes on a
piece of bark much more efficient and it allows us
to deal with a lot bigger quantities so if we have
K digits available on a piece of bark well with
natural numbers we can only get up to essentially
K but with these Hindu Arabic numerals we get up
to essentially 10 to the K so the possibilities
for having a arithmetic with bigger numbers is
vastly expanded now erid Bishop's important dictum
that meaningful distinctions need to be maintained
uh needs to be kept in mind here as well so we're
using these Hindu Arabic numerals now in a number
of different ways and it's probably good for us to
acknowledge these different ways that we're using
them so one way that we're using them is in an
expression like this we might write 34 is of type
natat and that means that this 34 is our Hindu
Arabic shortcut for the Primitive natural number
given by this okay so this is a primitive natural
number consisting of a bunch of strokes and we
would express it as 1 one one one one Etc 34 times
but instead of writing this or saying 1 one one
one one Etc 34 times we'll allow ourselves to use
our familiar Hindu Arabic number or numeral to
represent this thing we'll talk about the natural
number 34 right we do want to be able to talk
about the natural number 34 and write something
like this so when we're expressing A Primitive
natural number by a Hindu Arabic expression we're
going to use this form and this alerts us to the
fact that we're actually thinking of uh a number
of which is of type primitive natural number as
opposed to this usage where we have 34 is an
element of num okay so 34 being of type num is
a shortcut for a base 10 vexel so here this 34
is repres presenting this base 10 vexel so it's
a vexel in the base 10 system and I remind you
that is really this thing here okay so it's an M
set of Singletons with three zeros and four ones
so when we write 34 is of type num we're really
thinking in our minds that it represents this
thing when we represent or write down 34 is in
net we're thinking that it represents this thing
there's a big difference and let's also note that
actually we can go one level down because inside
here these things here are also natural numbers
but also in Hindu Arabic form right and we could
rewrite those just as primitive natural numbers
we can rewrite this zero as this empty M set and
we can rewrite that one that's sitting there as
the M set one which is the m set consisting of
a single stroke so if we're looking at 34 as a
Hindu Arabic numeral then ultimately it really
comes down to this perhaps somewhat formidable
looking expression but that's sort of stripped
of all higher level things and we're going right
down to the level of things involving emptiness
and something so it's emptiness or nothing and
something packaged up and presented in a suitable
data structure kind of way and I think it's useful
to just compare our orientation here with some
basic programming structure so in the programming
World there are various levels of programs lower
level programs and upper higher level programs
and uh so here's a kind of a simplified view of
that so at the at the bottom There's an actual
machine that runs some hardware and that machine
typically is very simplistic at some level be only
dealing with zeros and ones ultimately and then
you have some machine language that's basically
instructions that tells the computer what to do
in terms of moving zeros and ones and changing
them and maybe then you have an assembly language
which is a little bit more sophisticated but is
another way of expressing or telling the machine
what to do at the machine language level and then
there are these higher level languages where we um
we have higher level constructs and things like C
or Pascal or basic or Cobalt which ultimately
sort of generate Assembly Language stuff and
you know have to be compiled and assembled and so
on to eventually get the machine to run and then
there's other maybe even higher level languages
U maybe Java python mlab things like that okay
so there's a a kind of a level of of hierarchy of
sophistication and of power um but ultimately to
actually run you have to kind of go down and
actually tell ultimately the machine what to
actually do so unless you have some logical stream
that ultimately goes down here and is consistent
and correct then your program is not going to
work very well so analogous to that we're doing
something a little bit in the same direction
here uh we're thinking about having a system
of numbers which are based on something that's
very Elementary and perhaps simplistic our basic
dichotomy of nothing and something was we said
sort of at the heart of things that's sort of the
essential building blocks and from those things
we saw we could create natural numbers or these
primitive natural numbers and that's just one
step up from the sort of Basic Hardware or this
basic dichotomy of nothing and something and now
we've talked about these Hindu Arabic numerals or
num okay it's a little bit higher level okay it's
using the Primitive natural numbers but it's more
sophisticated U more complicated but also more
powerful more efficient in some ways and we might
also then want to go higher up because we also
want to think about Expressions that evaluate to
numbers right so so far we don't have any way of
talking about 8 to the 7 or 17 factorial or four
triangle 5 or any of these higher hyper operations
that we've been discussing so this is then a
natural kind of next realm to see can we jack
up our arithmetic with natural numbers from the
level of Hindu Arabic numerals to something more
sophisticated something more powerful something
that allows us to get at bigger and bigger numbers
well that's a very big challenge actually okay
and I think it's fair to say that currently in
modern mathematics we don't have a proper theory
of of these things but we do want to talk about
the challenges involved in setting up something
like that and the kinds of choices that we might
make so that's what we'll do in our next video
we'll talk about the possibilities for creating
a type in the direction of numb Expressions we're
looking for a way of working efficiently and
consistently with arithmetical Expressions that
evaluate to numbers I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening [Music]